.\"
.\" libraptor.3 - Raptor library manual page
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2002-2004 David Beckett - http://purl.org/net/dajobe/
.\" Institute for Learning and Research Technology - http://www.ilrt.bristol.ac.uk/
.\" University of Bristol - http://www.bristol.ac.uk/
.\"
.TH libraptor 3 "2004-01-24"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.SH NAME
libraptor \- Raptor RDF parser toolkit library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <raptor.h>
.br

.br
.BI raptor_init();
.br
.BI "raptor_parser *" p =raptor_new_parser("rdfxml");
.br
.BI raptor_set_statement_handler( p , NULL , print_statements );
.br
.BI "raptor_uri *" file_uri =raptor_new_uri("http://example.org/");
.br
.BI raptor_parse_file( p , file_uri , base_uri );
.br
.BI raptor_parse_uri( p , uri , NULL );
.br
.BI raptor_free_parser( p );
.br
.BI raptor_free_uri( file_uri );
.br
.BI raptor_finish();
.br

.B cc file.c -lraptor
.br
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIRaptor\fR library provides a high-level interface to a set
of RDF format parsers, presently RDF/XML and N-Triples.  The
parsers turn the syntax into a sequence of RDF triples/statements.
The RDF/XML parser uses either \fIexpat\fR or \fIlibxml\fR
XML parser for providing the SAX event stream.
The library functions are arranged in an object-oriented style with
constructors, destructors and method calls.  The statements
and error messages are delivered via callback functions.
.LP
Raptor contains a URI-reference parsing and resolving (not
retrieval) class (raptor_uri) sufficient for dealing with URI-references
inside RDF.  This functionality is modular and can be transparently replaced 
with another existing and compatible URI implementation.
.LP
It also provides a URI-retrieval class (raptor_www) for
wrapping existing library such as libcurl, libxml2 or BSD libfetch
that provides full or partial retrieval of data from URIs.
.SH LIBRARY INITIALISATION AND CLEANUP
.IP "\fBraptor_init()\fR"
.IP "\fBraptor_finish()\fR"
Initialise and cleanup the library.  These must be called before
any raptor_parser or raptor_uri is created or used.
.SH PARSER CONSTRUCTORS
.IP "\fBraptor_parser* raptor_new_parser(name)\fR"
Create a new raptor parser object for the parser with name
\fIname\fR currently either "rdfxml", "turtle" or
"rss-tag-soup" for the RSS Tag Soup parser.
.SH PARSER DESTRUCTORS
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_free_parser(raptor_parser *\fIparser\fB)\fR"
Destroy a Raptor parser object.
.SH "PARSER MESSAGE CALLBACK METHODS"
Several methods can be registered for the parser that return
a variable-argument message in the style of printf(3).  These
also return a \fIraptor_locator\fR
that can contain URI, file, line, column and byte counts of where
the message is about. This structure can be used with
the raptor_format_locator, raptor_print_locator functions below
or the structures fields directly, which are defined in raptor.h
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_fatal_error_handler(raptor_parser* \fIparser, void *\fIuser_data, raptor_message_handler handler)\fR"
Set fatal error handler callback.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_error_handler(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB, raptor_message_handler \fIhandler\fB)\fR"
Set non-fatal error handler callback.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_warning_handler(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB, raptor_message_handler \fIhandler\fB)\fR"
Set warning message handler callback.
.SH "PARSER STATEMENT CALLBACK METHOD"
The parser allows the registration of a callback function to return
the statements to the application.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_statement_handler(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB, raptor_statement_handler \fIhandler\fB)\fR"
Set the statement callback function for the parser.
The \fIraptor_statement\fR
structure is defined in raptor.h and includes fields for the
subject, predicate, object of the statements along with their types
and for literals, language and datatype.
.SH "PARSER PARSING METHODS"
These methods perform the entire parsing in one method.
Statements warnings, errors and fatal errors are delivered
via the registered statement, error etc. handler functions.
.LP
In both of these methods, the base URI is required for the RDF/XML
parser (name "rdfxml") and Turtle parser (name "turtle").
The N-Triples parser (name "ntriples") or
RSS Tag Soup parser (name "rss-tag-soup") do not use this.
.IP "\fBint raptor_parse_file(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB,  raptor_uri *\fIuri\fB, raptor_uri *\fIbase_uri\fB)\fR"
Parse the given filename (a URI like file:filename)
according to the optional base URI \fIbase_uri\fR.  If \fIuri\fR
is NULL, read from standard input and \fIbase_uri\fR is then required.
.IP "\fBint raptor_parse_file_stream(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, FILE* \fIstream\fB, const char* \fIfilename\fB, raptor_uri *\fIbase_uri\fB)\fR"
Parse the given C FILE* stream according to the base URI
\fIbase_uri\fR (required).  \fIfilename\fR is optional and
if given, is used for error messages via the raptor_locator structure.
.IP "\fBint raptor_parse_uri(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB,  raptor_uri* \fIuri\fB, raptor_uri *\fIbase_uri\fB)\fR"
Parse the URI according to the base URI \fIbase_uri\fR, or NULL if
not needed.  If no base URI is given, the \fIuri\fR is used.
This method depends on the raptor_www subsystem (see \fBWWW Class\fR
section below)
and an existing underlying URI retrieval implementation such as
libcurl, libxml or BSD libfetch to retrieve the content.
.SH "PARSER CHUNKED PARSING METHODS"
These methods perform the parsing in parts
by working on multiple chunks of memory passed by the application.
Statements warnings, errors and fatal errors are delivered
via the registered statement, error etc. handler functions.
.IP "\fBint raptor_start_parse(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, const char *\fIuri\fB)\fR"
Start a parse of chunked content with the base URI \fIuri\fR
or NULL if not needed.
The base URI is required for the RDF/XML parser (name "rdfxml")
and Turtle parser (name "turtle").
The N-Triples parser (name "ntriples") or RSS Tag Soup parser
(name "rss-tag-soup") do not use this.
.IP "\fBint raptor_parse_chunk(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB,  const unsigned char *buffer, size_t \fIlen\fB, int \fIis_end\fB)\fR"
Parse the memory at \fIbuffer\fR of size \fIlen\fR returning
statements via the statement handler callback.
If \fIis_end\fR is non-zero, it indicates the end of the parsing stream.
This method can only be called after raptor_start_parse.
.SH "PARSER UTILITY METHODS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_parser_strict(raptor_parser *\fIparser\fB, int \fIis_strict\fB)\fR"
Set the parser to strict (\fIis_strict\fR not zero)
or lax (default) mode.  The detail of the
strictness can be controlled by raptor_set_feature.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_feature(raptor_parser *\fIparser\fB, raptor_feature \fIfeature\fB, int \fIvalue\fB)\fR"
Set a parser feature \fIfeature\fR to a particular \fIvalue\fR.
The current defined features are:
  \fIFeature                                 Values\fR
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_SCANNING\fR                 Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_ASSUME_IS_RDF\fR            Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_ALLOW_NON_NS_ATTRIBUTES\fR  Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_ALLOW_OTHER_PARSETYPES\fR   Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_ALLOW_BAGID\fR              Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_ALLOW_RDF_TYPE_RDF_LIST\fR  Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_NORMALIZE_LANGUAGE\fR       Boolean (non 0 true)
  \fBRAPTOR_FEATURE_NON_NFC_FATAL\fR            Boolean (non 0 true)
If the \fIscanning\fR
feature is true (default false), then the RDF/XML parser will look for embedded
rdf:RDF elements inside the XML content, and not require that the
XML start with an rdf:RDF root element.
.P
If the \fIassume_is_rdf\fR
feature is true (default false), then the RDF/XML parser will assume
the content is RDF/XML, not require that rdf:RDF root element, and
immediately interpret the content as RDF/XML.
.P
If the \fIallow_non_ns_attributes\fR
feature is true (default true), then the RDF/XML parser will allow
non-XML namespaced attributes to be accepted
as well as rdf: namespaced ones.  For example, 'about' and 'ID' will
be interpreted as if they were rdf:about and rdf:ID respectively.
.P
If the \fIallow_other_parsetypes\fR
feature is true (default true) then the RDF/XML parser will allow
unknown parsetypes to be present and will pass them on to the user.
Unimplemented at present.
.P
If the \fIallow_bagid\fR
feature is true (default true) then the RDF/XML parser will support
the rdf:bagID attribute that was removed from the RDF/XML language
when it was revised.  This support may be removed in future.
.P
If the \fIallow_rdf_type_rdf_list\fR
feature is true (default false) then the RDF/XML parser will generate the
idList rdf:type rdf:List triple in the handling of
rdf:parseType="Collection".  This triple was removed during the
revising of RDF/XML after collections were initially added.
.P
If the \fInormalize_language\fR
feature is true (default true) then XML language values
such as from xml:lang will be normalized to lowercase.
.P
If the \fInon_nfc_fatal\fR
feature is true (default false) then illegal Unicode Normal Form C
in literals will give a fatal error, otherwise it gives a warning.
.IP "\fBraptor_locator* raptor_get_locator(raptor_parser* \fIrdf_parser\fB)\fR"
Return the current raptor_locator object for the parser.
This is a public structure defined in raptor.h that can be
used directly, or formatted via raptor_print_locator.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_get_name(raptor_parser *\fIparser\fB\fB)\fR"
Return the string short name for the parser.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_get_label(raptor_parser *\fIparser\fB\fB)\fR"
Return a string label for the parser.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_default_generate_id_parameters(raptor_parser* \fIrdf_parser\fB, char *\fIprefix\fB, int \fIbase\fB)\fR"
Control the default method for generation of IDs for blank nodes and
bags.  The method uses a short string \fIprefix\fR and an integer
\fIbase\fR to generate the identifier which is not guaranteed to
be a strict concatenation.  If \fIprefix\fR is NULL, the
default is used.  If base is less than 1, it is initialised to 1.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_set_generate_id_handler(raptor_parser* \fIparser\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB, raptor_generate_id_handler \fIhandler\fB)\fR"
Allow full customisation of the generated IDs by setting a callback
\fIhandler\fR and associated \fIuser_data\fR that is called whenever
a blank node or bag identifier is required.
.SH "PARSER UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_parsers_enumerate(const unsigned int \fIcounter\fB, const char **name, const char **\fIlabel\fB)\fR"
Return the parser name/label for a parser with a given integer
counter, returning non-zero if no such parser at that offset
exists.  The counter should start from 0 and be incremented by 1
until the function returns non-zero.
.IP "\fBint raptor_syntaxes_enumerate(const unsigned int \fIcounter\fB, const char **name, const char **\fIlabel\fB, const char **\fImime_type\fB, const unsigned char **\fIuri-string\fB)\fR"
Return the name, label, mime type or URI string (all optional)
for a parser syntax with a given integer counter, returning non-zero
if no such syntax parser at that offset exists.
The counter should start from 0 and be incremented by 1
until the function returns non-zero.
.SH "STATEMENT UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_print_statement(const raptor_statement* const \fIstatement\fB, FILE *\fIstream\fB)\fR"
Print a raptor statement object in a simple format for debugging only.
The format of this output is not guaranteed to remain the same
between releases.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_print_statement_as_ntriples(const raptor_statement* \fIstatement\fB, FILE *\fIstream\fB)\fR"
Print a raptor statement object in N-Triples format, using all the
escapes as defined in
.UR http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
.UE
.IP "\fBraptor_statement_part_as_counted_string(const void *\fIterm\fB, raptor_identifier_type \fItype\fB, raptor_uri* \fIliteral_datatype\fB, const unsigned char *\fIliteral_language\fB, size_t* \fIlen_p\fB)\fR"
.IP "\fBchar* raptor_statement_part_as_string(const void *\fIterm\fB, raptor_identifier_type \fItype\fB, raptor_uri* \fIliteral_datatype\fB, const unsigned char *\fIliteral_language\fB)\fR"
Turns part of raptor statement into N-Triples format, using all the
escapes as defined in
.UR http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
.UE
The part (subject, predicate, object) of the raptor_statement is
passed in as \fIterm\fR, the part type (subject_type, predicate_type,
object_type) is passed in as \fItype\fR.  When the part is a literal,
the \fIliteral_datatype\fR and \fIliteral_language\fR fields are set,
otherwise NULL (usually object_datatype, object_literal_language).
.IP
If \fBraptor_statement_part_as_counted_string\fR is used,
the length of the returned string is stored in *\fIlen_p\fR if not NULL.
.SH "LOCATOR UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_format_locator(char *\fIbuffer\fB, size_t \fIlength\fB, raptor_locator* \fIlocator\fB)\fR"
This method takes a \fIraptor_locator\fR object as passed to an
error, warning or other handler callback and formats it into the
\fIbuffer\fR of size \fIlength\fR bytes.  If \fIbuffer\fR is NULL or
\fIlength\fR is insufficient for the size of the formatted locator,
returns the number of additional bytes required in the buffer to
write the locator.

In particular, if this form is used:
  length=raptor_format_locator(NULL, 0, locator)
it will return in \fIlength\fR the size of a buffer that can be allocated for
\fIlocator\fR and a second call will perform the formatting:
  raptor_format_locator(buffer, length, locator)

.IP "\fBvoid raptor_print_locator(FILE *\fIstream\fB, raptor_locator* \fIlocator\fB)\fR"
This method takes a \fIraptor_locator\fR object as passed to an
error, warning or other handler callback, formats and prints it to
the given stdio \fIstream\fR.
.SH "N-TRIPLES UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_print_ntriples_string(FILE* \fIstream\fB, const char* \fIstring\fB, const char \fIdelim\fB)\fR"
This is a standalone function that prints the given string
according to N-Triples escaping rules, expecting to be delimited
by the character \fIdelim\fR which is usually either " or <
.IP "\fBconst char* raptor_ntriples_term_as_string (raptor_ntriples_term_type term)\fR"
.SH "XML UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBsize_t raptor_xml_escape_string(const unsigned char *\fIstring\fB, size_t \fIlen\fB, unsigned char *\fIbuffer\fB, size_t \fIlength\fB, char \fIquote\fB, raptor_message_handler \fIerror_handler\fB, void *\fIerror_data\fB)\fR"
Apply the XML escaping rules to the string given in (string, len)
into the buffer of size length.  If quote
is given, the escaped content is for an XML attribute and the
appropriate quote character \" or \' is used, otherwise it is
XML element content (CDATA).   The \fIerror_handler\fR method along
with \fIerror_data\fR allow error reporting to be given.
If buffer is NULL, returns the size of the buffer required to escape.
Otherwise the return value is the number of bytes used or 0 on failure.
.SH "STATIC VARIABLES"
There are several read-only static variables in the raptor library:
.IP "\fBconst char * const raptor_short_copyright_string\fR"
Short copyright string, suitable for one line.
.IP "\fBconst char * const raptor_copyright_string\fR"
Full copyright over several lines including URLs.
.IP "\fBconst char * const raptor_version_string\fR"
The version as a string
.IP "\fBconst unsigned int raptor_version_major\fR"
The major version number as an integer.
.IP "\fBconst unsigned int raptor_version_minor\fR"
The minor version number as an integer.
.IP "\fBconst unsigned int raptor_version_release\fR"
The release version number as an integer.
.IP "\fBconst unsigned int raptor_version_decimal\fR"
The version number as a single decimal.
.SH "URI CLASS"
Raptor has a raptor_uri class must be used for manipulating and
passing URI references.  The default internal implementation
uses char* strings for URIs, manipulating them and constructing them.
This URI implementation can be replaced by any other that provides the
equivalent functionality, using the raptor_uri_set_handler function.

.SH "URI CONSTRUCTORS"
There a several constructors for raptor_uri to build them from
char* strings and existing raptor_uri objects.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri(const unsigned char* \fIuri_string\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor URI from a string URI-reference
\fIuri_string\fR.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri_from_uri_local_name(raptor_uri* \fIuri\fB, const unsigned char* \fIlocal_name\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor URI from a string URI-reference
\fIlocal_name\fR
relative to an existing URI-reference.  This performs concatenation of the 
\fIlocal_name\fR
to the
\fIuri\fR
and not relative URI resolution, which is done by the
raptor_new_uri_relative_to_base constructor.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri_relative_to_base(raptor_uri* \fIbase_uri, const unsigned char* \fIuri_string\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor URI from a string URI-reference
\fIuri_string\fR
using relative URI resolution to the
\fIbase_uri\fR.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri_from_id(raptor_uri* \fIbase_uri\fB, const unsigned char* \fIid\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor URI from a string RDF ID
\fIid\fR
concatenated to the
\fIbase_uri\fR
base URI.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri_for_rdf_concept(const char* \fIname\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor URI for the RDF namespace concept
\fIname\fR.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_new_uri_for_xmlbase(raptor_uri* \fIold_uri\fB))\fR"
Create a raptor URI suitable for use with xml:base (throw away fragment)
.SH "URI DESTRUCTOR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_free_uri(raptor_uri* \fIuri\fB)\fR"
Destroy a raptor URI object.
.SH "URI METHODS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_uri_equals(raptor_uri* \fIuri1\fB, raptor_uri* \fIuri2\fB)\fR"
Return non-zero if the given URIs are equal.
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_uri_copy(raptor_uri* \fIuri\fB)\fR"
Return a copy of the given raptor URI \fIuri\fR.
.IP "\fBunsigned char* raptor_uri_as_counted_string(raptor_uri *uri, size_t* len_p)\fR"
.IP "\fBunsigned char* raptor_uri_as_string(raptor_uri* \fIuri\fB)\fR"
Return a shared pointer to a string representation of the given raptor URI
\fIuri\fR.  This string is shared and must not be freed.  If
raptor_uri_as_counted_string is used, the length of the returned
string is stored in *len_p if not NULL.
.SH "URI UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_uri_resolve_uri_reference (const unsigned char* \fIbase_uri\fB, const unsigned char* \fIreference_uri\fB, char unsigned* \fIbuffer\fB, size_t \fIlength\fB)\fR"
This is a standalone function that resolves the relative URI
\fIreference_uri\fR against the base URI \fIbase_uri\fR
according to the URI resolution rules in RFC2396.
The resulting URI is stored in \fIbuffer\fR which is of \fIlength\fR
bytes.  If this is too small, no work will be done.
.IP "\fBchar *raptor_uri_filename_to_uri_string(const unsigned char* \fIfilename\fB)\fR
This is a standalone function that turns a local filename (Windows
or Unix style as appropriate for platform) into a URI string (file).
 The returned string must be freed by the caller.
.IP "\fBchar *raptor_uri_uri_string_to_filename(const unsigned char* \fIuri_string\fB)\fR
This is a standalone function that turns a URI string that
represents a local filename (file:) into a filename.  The returned string
must be freed by the caller.
.IP "\fBint raptor_uri_is_file_uri(const unsigned char* \fIuri_string\fB)\fR
Returns non-zero if the given URI string represents a filename,
is a file: URI.
.SH "URI CLASS IMPLEMENTATION"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_uri_set_handler(raptor_uri_handler *\fIhandler\fB, void *\fIcontext\fB)\fR
Change the URI class implementation to the functions provided by the
\fIhandler\fR
URI implementation.
The
\fIcontext\fR
user data is passed in to the handler URI implementation calls.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_uri_get_handler(raptor_uri_handler **\fIhandler\fB, void **\fIcontext\fB)\fR
Return the current raptor URI class implementation
\fIhandler\fR
and
\fIcontext\fR

.SH "WWW CLASS"
This is a small wrapper class around existing WWW libraries in
order to provide HTTP GET or better URI retrieval for Raptor.  It
is not intended to be a general purpose WWW retrieval interface.
.SH "WWW CLASS INITIALISATION AND CLEANUP"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_init(void)\fR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_finish(void)\fR"
Initialise or terminate the raptor_www infrastructure.  raptor_www_init
and raptor_finish are called by raptor_init and raptor_finish
respecitively, otherwise must be called once each.
.IP NOTE
Several of the WWW library implementations require once-only
initialisation and termination functions to be called, however raptor
cannot determine whether this is already done before the library
is initialised in \fBraptor_www_init\fR or terminated in 
\fBraptor_www_finish\fR, so always performs it.
This can be changed by \fBraptor_www_no_www_library_init_finish\fR.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_no_www_library_init_finish(void)\fR"
If this is called before \fBraptor_www_init\fR, it will not call
the underlying WWW library global initialise or terminate functions.
The application code must perform both operations.
.IP
For example with curl, after this function is called, neither
\fBcurl_global_init\fR nor \fBcurl_global_cleanup\fR will be called
during \fBraptor_www_init\fR or \fBraptor_www_finish\fR respectively.
.SH "WWW CONSTRUCTORS"
.IP "\fBraptor_www *raptor_www_new(void)\fR"
.IP "\fBraptor_www *raptor_www_new_with_connection(void* \fIconnection\fB)\fR"
Create a raptor WWW object capable of URI retrieval.  If \fIconnection\fR
is given, it must match the connection object of the underlying WWW
implementation.  At present, this is only for libcurl, and allows you
to re-use an existing curl handle, or use one which has been set up
with some desired qualities.
.SH "WWW DESTRUCTOR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_free(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB)\fR"
Destroy a raptor WWW object.
.SH "WWW METHODS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_set_user_agent(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB, const char *\fIuser_agent\fB)\fR"
Set the user agent, for HTTP requests typically.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_set_proxy(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB, const char *\fIproxy\fB)\fR"
Set the HTTP proxy - usually a string of the form http://server:port
.IP "\fBraptor_www_set_write_bytes_handler(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB, raptor_www_write_bytes_handler \fIhandler\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB)\fR"
Set the handler to receive bytes written by the raptor_www implementation.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_set_content_type_handler(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB, raptor_www_content_type_handler \fIhandler\fB, void *\fIuser_data\fB)\fR"
Set the handler to receive the HTTP Content-Type value, when/if
discovered during retrieval by the raptor_www implementation.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_set_error_handler(raptor_www *www\fB, raptor_message_handler \fIerror_handler\fB, void *\fIerror_data\fB)\fR"
Set the error handler routine for the raptor_www class.  This takes the
same arguments as the raptor_parser error, warning handler methods.
.IP "\fBvoid* raptor_www_get_connection(raptor_www *\fIwww\fB)\fR"
Return the underlying WWW library connection object.  For example,
for libcurl this is the curl_handle.
.SH "WWW ACTION METHODS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_www_fetch(raptor_www *www, raptor_uri *uri)\fR"
Retrieve the given URL, returning non zero on failure.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_www_abort(raptor_www *www, const char *reason)\fR"
Abort an ongoing raptor WWW operation. Typically used within one of the
raptor WWW handlers.
.SH "QNAME CLASS"
This is a class for handling XML QNames consisting
of the pair of (a URI from a namespace, a local name) along with 
an optional value -- useful for XML attributes.  This is used with
the raptor_namespace_stack and raptor_namespace classes to handle a
stack of raptor_namespace that build on raptor_qname.
.SH "QNAME CONSTRUCTORS"
There are two constructors for raptor_qname to build qnames
with optional values on a stack of names.
.IP "\fBraptor_qname* raptor_new_qname(raptor_namespace_stack *\fInstack\fB, const unsigned char *\fIname\fB, const unsigned char *\fIvalue\fB, raptor_simple_message_handler \fIerror_handler\fB, void *\fIerror_data\fB)"
Create a raptor QName \fIname\fR (a possibly :-separated name) with
name to be resolved against the given \fInstack\fR namespace stack.
An optional \fIvalue\fR can be given, and if there is an error,
the \fIerror_handler\fB and \fIerror_data\fR will be used to invoke
the callback.
.IP "\fBraptor_qname* raptor_new_qname_from_namespace_local_name (raptor_namespace *\fIns\fB, const unsigned char *\fIlocal_name\fB, const unsigned char *\fIvalue\fB)"
Create a raptor QName using the namespace name of the
raptor_namespace \fIns\fR and the local name \fIlocal_name\fR, along
with optional value \fIvalue\fR.  Errors are reported using
the error handling and data of the namespace.
.SH "QNAME DESTRUCTOR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_free_qname(raptor_qname* \fIname\fB)\fR"
Destroy a raptor qname object
.SH "QNAME METHODS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_qname_equal(raptor_qname *\fIname1\fR, raptor_qname *\fIname2\fB)\fR"
Return non-zero if the given QNames are equal.
.SH "QNAME UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_qname_string_to_uri(raptor_namespace_stack *\fInstack\fB,  const unsigned char *\fIname\fB, size_t \fIname_len\fB, raptor_simple_message_handler \fIerror_handler\fB, void *\fIerror_data\fB)\fR"
Return the URI corresponding to the QName according to the RDF
method; concatenating the namespace's name (URI) with the local
name.  Takes the same arguments as \fBraptor_new_qname\fR but
does not create a raptor_qname object.
.SH "NAMESPACE CLASS"
An XML namespace class - each entry is on a stack and consists of a
name (URI) and prefix.  The prefix or the name but not both may be
empty.  If the prefix is empty, it defines the default prefix.  If
the name is empty, it undefines the given prefix.
.SH "NAMESPACE CONSTRUCTOR"
.IP "\fBraptor_namespace* raptor_new_namespace(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, const unsigned char *prefix, const unsigned char *ns_uri_string, int depth)\fR"
Create a raptor_namespace object on the given namespace stack
\fInstack\fR with prefix \fIprefix\fR and namespace name (URI string)
\fIns_uri_string\fR.  If \fIprefix\fR is NULL, it defines the URI for the
default namespace prefix.  If the \fIns_uri_string\fR is NULL, it undefines
the given \fIprefix\fR in the current scope.  Both may not be NULL.
\fIdepth\fR signifies the position of the namespace on the stack;
0 is the bottom of the stack and generally the first depth for
user namespace declarations.  Namespaces declared on the same
depth (such as on the same XML element, typically) can be handily
freed with \fIraptor_namespaces_end_for_depth\fR method on
the namespace stack class.
.SH "NAMESPACE DESTRUCTOR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_free_namespace(raptor_namespace *ns)\fR"
Destroy a raptor namespace object.
.SH "NAMESPACE METHODS"
.IP "\fBraptor_uri* raptor_namespace_get_uri(const raptor_namespace *ns)\fR"
Return the namespace name (URI) of the namespace.
.IP "\fBconst unsigned char* raptor_namespace_get_prefix(const raptor_namespace *ns)\fR"
Return the prefix of the namespace.
.IP "\fBunsigned char *raptor_namespaces_format(const raptor_namespace *ns, size_t *length_p)\fR"
Format the namespace as a string and return it as a new string, returning the
length of the resulting string in \fIlength_p\fR if it is not NULL.
The string format is suitable for emitting in XML to declare the
namespace.
.SH "NAMESPACE UTILITY FUNCTIONS"
.IP "\fBint raptor_namespace_copy(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, raptor_namespace *ns, int new_depth)\fR"
Copy the namespace from the current stack to the new one,
\fInstack\fR at depth \fInew_depth\fR.
.SH "NAMESPACE STACK CLASS"
A stack of raptor_namespace objects where the namespaces on top of the stack
have wider scope and override earlier (lower) namespace declarations.
Intended to match the XML namespace declaring semantics using
xmlns attributes.
.SH "NAMESPACE STACK CONSTRUCTORS"
.IP "\fBraptor_namespace_stack* raptor_new_namespaces(raptor_uri_handler *uri_handler, void *uri_context, raptor_simple_message_handler error_handler, void *error_data, int defaults)\fR"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_namespaces_init(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, raptor_uri_handler *handler, void *context, raptor_simple_message_handler error_handler, void *error_data, int defaults)\fR"
Create or initialise a new raptor_namespace_stack object with the given URI and
error handlers.  \fBraptor_namespaces_new\fR allocates new memory
for the namespace stack and \fBraptor_namespaces_init\fR initialises an
existing declared \fInstack\fR, which could be statically allocated.
Note that \fBraptor_uri_get_handler\fR can be useful to return the
current raptor URI handler/context.  The \fIdefaults\fR argument
describes which default namespaces are declared in the empty stack.
At present, 0 is none, 1 for just the XML namespace and 2 is for
a typical set of namespaces used for RDF, RDFS, Dublin Core, OWL, ...
that may vary over time.
.SH "NAMESPACE STACK DESTRUCTORS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_free_namespaces(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack)\fR"
Destroy a namespace stack object, freeing the \fInstack\fR
(goes with \fBraptor_new_namespaces\fR).
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_namespaces_clear(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack)\fR"
Clear a statically allocated namespace stack; does not free the \fInstack\fR.
(goes with \fBraptor_namespaces_init\fR).
.SH "NAMESPACE STACK METHODS"
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_namespaces_start_namespace(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, raptor_namespace *nspace)\fR"
Start the given \fInspace\fR on the stack, at the depth already defined.
.IP "\fBint raptor_namespaces_start_namespace_full(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, const unsigned char *prefix, const unsigned char *nspace, int depth)\fR"
Create a new raptor_namespace and start it on the stack.
See \fBraptor_new_namespace\fR for the meaning of the argumens.
.IP "\fBvoid raptor_namespaces_end_for_depth(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, int depth)\fR"
End (and free) all namespaces on the stack at the given \fIdepth\fR.
.IP "\fBraptor_namespace* raptor_namespaces_get_default_namespace (raptor_namespace_stack *nstack)\fR"
Return the current default raptor_namespace of the namespace stack
or NULL if there is none.
.IP "\fBraptor_namespace *raptor_namespaces_find_namespace (raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, const unsigned char *prefix, int prefix_length)\fR"
Find the first namespace on the stack with the given namespace \fIprefix\fR
or NULL if there is none.
.IP "\fBint raptor_namespaces_namespace_in_scope(raptor_namespace_stack *nstack, const raptor_namespace *nspace)\fR"
Return non-zero if the raptor_namespace \fInspace\fR is declared
on the stack; i.e. in scope if this is a stack of XML namespaces.
.SH API CHANGES
.SS 1.2.0
Added \fBraptor_syntaxes_enumerate\fR to get full information
on syntax mime type and URIs as well as name and label.
.br
N-Triples Plus parser renamed to Turtle (name turtle)
.SS 1.1.0
Added N-Triples Plus parser (name ntriples-plus)
.br
Made URI class constructors, methods and factory methods as
well as some other utility functions using or returning URIs or
literals take unsigned char* rather than char*.  The affected calls are:
.br
  \fBraptor_new_uri_func\fR
  \fBraptor_new_uri_from_local_name_func\fR
  \fBraptor_new_uri_relative_to_base_func\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_as_string_func\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_as_counted_string_func\fR
    URI factory methods changed to all take/return unsigned char* for URI strings.
  \fBraptor_statement_part_as_counted_string\fR
  \fBraptor_statement_part_as_string\fR
  \fBraptor_new_uri\fR
  \fBraptor_new_uri_from_uri_local_name\fR
  \fBraptor_new_uri_relative_to_base\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_as_string\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_as_counted_string\fR
  \fBraptor_print_ntriples_string\fR
    Constructors and methods changed to take/return unsigned char* for URI strings.
  \fBraptor_uri_resolve_uri_reference\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_filename_to_uri_string\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_uri_string_to_filename\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_uri_string_to_filename_fragment\fR
  \fBraptor_uri_is_file_uri\fR
    Changed to use unsigned char* for URI strings, char* for filenames.
  \fBraptor_ntriples_string_as_utf8_string\fR
    Changed to return unsigned char* for UTF8 string.
.br
Added \fBraptor_parsers_enumerate\fR to discover supported parsers.
.br
Added \fBraptor_uri_uri_string_to_filename_fragment\fR with fragment arg to
return the URI fragment.
.br
Made the raptor_namespace, raptor_namespace_stack and raptor_qname
class and APIs public.
.br
Added feature non_nfc_fatal (see raptor_set_feature documentation).
.SS 1.0.0
Removed the following deprecated methods and functions (see 0.9.6
changes for the new names):
.br
\fBraptor_free\fR, \fBraptor_new\fR, \fBraptor_ntriples_free\fR,
\fBraptor_ntriples_new\fR, \fBraptor_ntriples_parse_file\fR,
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_error_handler\fR,
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_fatal_error_handler\fR,
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_statement_handler\fR and \fBraptor_parser_abort\fR.
.br
Added \fBraptor_parse_file_stream\fR
for reading FILE* streams without necessarily having a file.
.SS 0.9.12
Added \fBraptor_new_uri_for_retrieval\fR
to turn URI references into URIs suitable for retrieval (no fragments).
.SS 0.9.11
Added \fBraptor_get_name\fR and \fBraptor_get_label\fR.
.br
\fBraptor_xml_escape_string\fR now takes error message handler, data
pointer, loses parser argument.
.br
Added \fBraptor_set_default_generate_id_parameters\fR and
\fBraptor_set_generate_id_handler\fR to control the default
generation of IDs, allow full customisation.
.SS 0.9.10
Added \fBraptor_set_parser_strict\fR
and \fBraptor_www_no_www_library_init_finish\fR.
.br
\fBraptor_xml_escape_string\fR now takes an output string length pointer.
.br
Added \fBraptor_statement_part_as_counted_string\fR,
\fBraptor_statement_part_as_string and \fBraptor_parse_abort\fR.
.br
Deprecated \fBraptor_parser_abort\fR.
.SS 0.9.9
Added raptor_www class and all its constructors, destructor, methods, calls.
.br
Added \fBraptor_parse_uri\fR, \fBraptor_parser_abort\fR, \fBraptor_ntriples_term_as_string\fR and \fBraptor_xml_escape_string\fR.
.SS 0.9.7
\fBraptor_parse_chunk, \fBraptor_new_uri_from_id\fR, arguments are now unsigned char.
.br
Added \fBraptor_new_uri_for_xmlbase\fR.
.SS 0.9.6
In this version, the raptor/ntriples parser calling APIs were
modified.  The following table lists the changes:
.ta \w'raptor_ntriples_set_fatal_error_handler  'u+\n(Spu
.LP
\fIOLD API	NEW API (0.9.6+)\fR
.br
\fBraptor_new()\fR	\fBraptor_new_parser("rdfxml")\fR
.br
\fBntriples_new()\fR	\fBraptor_new_parser("ntriples")\fR
.br
\fBraptor_free\fR	\fBraptor_free_parser\fR
.br
\fBntriples_free\fR	\fBraptor_ntriples_parser\fR
.br
\fBraptor_ntriples_parse_file\fR	\fBraptor_parse_file\fR
.br
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_error_handler\fR	\fBraptor_set_error_handler\fR
.br
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_fatal_error_handler\fR	\fBraptor_set_fatal_error_handler\fR
.br
\fBraptor_ntriples_set_statement_handler\fR	\fBraptor_set_statement_handler\fR
.br
.SH "CONFORMING TO"
\fIRDF/XML Syntax (Revised)\fR, Dave Beckett (ed.)
W3C Proposed Recommendation,
.UR http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar/
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-syntax-grammar/
.UE

\fIN-Triples\fR, in \fIRDF Test Cases\fR, Jan Grant and Dave Beckett (eds.)
W3C Proposed Recommendation,
.UR http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-testcases/#ntriples
.UE

\fITurtle - Terse RDF Triple Language\fR, Dave Beckett,
.UR http://www.ilrt.bristol.ac.uk/discovery/2004/01/turtle/
http://www.ilrt.bristol.ac.uk/discovery/2004/01/turtle/
.UE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rapper (1), raptor-config (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Dave Beckett - 
.UR http://purl.org/net/dajobe/
http://purl.org/net/dajobe/
.UE
.br
.UR
Institute for Learning and Research Technology (ILRT)
http://www.ilrt.bristol.ac.uk/
.UE
.br
.UR
University of Bristol
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/
.UE
